Power BI is the collective name for an assortment of cloud-based apps and services that help organizations collate, manage, and analyze data from a variety of sources, through a user-friendly interface. Business intelligence tools like Power BI can be used for a multitude of purposes.
Software Genre Business intelligence
Developer Microsoft

Microsoft Power BI is a business intelligence platform that provides nontechnical business users with tools for aggregating, analyzing, visualizing and sharing data. Power BI's user interface is fairly intuitive for users familiar with Excel and its deep integration with other Microsoft products makes it a very versatile self-service tool that requires little upfront training.

Microsoft Power BI is used to find insights within an organization's data. Power BI can help connect disparate data sets, transform and clean the data into a data model and create charts or graphs to provide visuals of the data. All of this can be shared with other Power BI users within the organization.

The data models created from Power BI can be used in several ways for organizations, including telling stories through charts and data visualizations and examining "what if" scenarios within the data. Power BI reports can also answer questions in real time and help with forecasting to make sure departments meet business metrics.

Power BI can also provide executive dashboards for administrators or managers, giving management more insight into how departments are doing.

Key features of Power BI
Microsoft has added a number of data analytics features to Power BI since its inception, and continues to do so. Some of the most important features include:

Artificial Intelligence -- Users can access image recognition and text analytics in Power BI, create machine learning models using automated machine learning capabilities and integrate with Azure Machine Learning.

Hybrid deployment support -- This feature provides built-in connectors that allow Power BI tools to connect with a number of different data sources from Microsoft, Salesforce and other vendors.

Quick Insights -- This feature allows users to create subsets of data and automatically apply analytics to that information.

Common data model support -- Power BI's support for the common data model allows the use of a standardized and extensible collection of data schemas (entities, attributes and relationships).

Cortana integration -- This feature, which is especially popular on mobile devices, allows users to verbally query data using natural language and access results, using Cortana, Microsoft's digital assistant.

Customization -- This feature allows developers to change the appearance of default visualization and reporting tools and import new tools into the platform.

APIs for integration -- This feature provides developers with sample code and application performance interfaces (APIs) for embedding the Power BI dashboard in other software products.

Self-service data prep -- Using Power Query, business analysts can ingest, transform, integrate and enrich big data into the Power BI web service. Ingested data can be shared across multiple Power BI models, reports and dashboards.

Modeling view -- This allows users to divide complex data models by subject area into separate diagrams, multiselect objects and set common properties, view and modify properties in the properties pane, and set display folders for simpler consumption of complex data models.

Microsoft Power BI updates
Power BI was originally called Project Crescent and was initially available in July 2011, bundled with SQL Server, codename Denali. It was then renamed Power BI and unveiled in September 2013 as Power BI for Office 365. Initially based off Excel features like Power Query, Power Pivot and Power View, Microsoft added features over time, including enterprise-level data connectivity and security options. Power BI was released as a stand-alone product in July 2015.

Today, Microsoft updates the Power BI application with new features and improvements on a monthly basis. To get the updates, users can download the latest edition from the Power BI site or Windows 10 users can get Power BI Desktop from the Windows Store.

Microsoft Power BI works by connecting data sources and providing a dashboard of business intelligence to the users. It can connect with just an Excel spreadsheet or bring together cloud-based and on-premises data warehouses. Data pulled from cloud-based sources, such as Salesforce CRM, is automatically refreshed. With applications such as an Excel workbook or Power BI Desktop file connected to online or on-premises data sources, Power BI users must manually refresh or setup a refresh schedule to ensure the data in Power BI reports and dashboards use the most current data available.